
Simulation Building Blocks
==========================

SimCADO objects
---------------

Source
~~~~~~

The ``Source`` class is probably the most important class for testing
science cases. Therefore spending time on creating accurate ``Source``
representations of the object of interest is key to getting good results
with SimCADO.

Basically a ``Source`` object represents photon sources using lists of
positions (``.x, .y``), a list of unique spectra (``.spectra``) and a
list of references which match each photon source to a spectrum in the
list of spectra (``.ref``). All sources (extended and point source) can
be decomposed into these lists. The advantage of using this approach is
that objects with highly similar spectra can both reference the same
position in ``.spectra``, thereby reducing the number of spectra that
need to be manipulated during a simulation.

File Format of saved ``Source`` objects
***************************************

``Source`` objects are stored as FITS files with 2 extensions. The first
(ext=0) contains an image with dimensions (n, 4) where n is the number
of positions for which there exists a spectrum - i.e. non-empty space.
The 4 rows of the image correspond to the ``.x, .y, .ref, .weight``
arrays. The second extension (ext=1) contains another image with
dimensions (m+1, len(lam)), where m is the number of unique spectra and
len(lam) is the length of the ``.lam`` array containing the centres of
all wavelength bins. The first row in the second extension is the
``.lam`` array.


.. todo::
    describe how ``Source`` is linked to ``OpticalTrain``, ``Detector`` and
    ``UserCommands``


OpticalTrain
~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. todo::
    describe how ``OpticalTrain`` is linked to ``Source``, ``Detector`` and
    ``UserCommands``

Detector
~~~~~~~~
.. todo::
    describe how ``Detector`` is linked to ``Source``, ``OpticalTrain`` and
    ``UserCommands``

UserCommands
~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. todo::
    descript how ``UserCommands`` is linked to ``Source``, ``OpticalTrain`` and 
    ``Detector``


SimCADO methods
---------------

Method behind applying an ``OpticalTrain`` to a ``Source`` object
-----------------------------------------------------------------

(Taken from Leschinski et al. 2016)

In an ideal world, SimCADO would apply all spectral and spatial changes
at the resolution of the input data. However, the memory requirements to
do this are well outside the limits of a personal computer. The solution
to this problem is to split the effects based on dimensionality. For
certain elements in the optical train, the spectral and spatial effects
can be decoupled (e.g. purely transmissive elements like the filters
versus purely spatial effects like telescope vibration). For other
elements, most notably the PSF and ADC, all three dimensions must be
considered simultaneously. When applying an ``OpticalTrain``, SimCADO
follows the procedure described graphically in Figure 1. The example
used in Figure 1 is for a simplified stellar cluster with only two
different stellar types - A0V and K5V type stars.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/apply_optical_train.png
    :figwidth: 600 px
   
    Figure 1 - The steps involved in applying an ``OpticalTrain`` object to
    a ``Source`` object. The example used here is for a simplified stellar
    cluster with only two different stellar types - A0V and K5V type stars.

    -  **A.** The original ``Source`` object includes an array of spectra
       for each **unique** photon source (in the case of Figure 1, there are
       only two unique spectra) and four vectors: ``x``, ``y``, ``ref``,
       ``weight``. ``x`` and ``y`` hold the spatial information for each
       photon source, ``ref`` connects each source to a spectrum in the
       array of spectra and ``weight`` allows the spectrum to be scaled.

    -  **Spectral-effects**. The first step in ``apply_optical_train()`` is
       to combine all optical elements which only act in the wavelength
       domain (e.g. filters, mirrors, etc.) into a single effect, then apply
       that effect to the array of spectra in the ``Source`` object.

    -  **B.** The spectra in the ``Source`` object are now representative of
       the photo-electron count at the detector, assuming a perfect optical
       train and at the internal spatial resolution of the simulation, i.e.
       *not at the pixel scale of the detector*. The position vectors are
       converted into a two-dimensional “image” of the ``Source``.

    -  **Spectrospatial-effects.** The second step includes creating
       “slices” through the data. The spectra are binned according to
       several criteria (ADC shift, PSF FWHM difference, etc) with a
       spectral resolution anywhere from R=1 to R>100, and the number of
       photons per source in each wavelength bin is calculated. The sources
       in each “slice” are scaled according to the number of photons in each
       bin. The relevant spatial effects (atmospheric dispersion,
       convolution with PSF kernel, etc.) are then applied to each slice in
       turn.

    -  **C.** At this stage, the ``Source`` object contains many spectral
       slices. Each is essentially the equivalent of a (*very*) narrow-band
       filter image.

    -  **D.** All spectral effects have been taken into account, and so the
       binning in the spectral domain is no longer needed. The third step in
       ``apply_optical_train()`` is to add all the slices together to create
       a single monochrome image.

    -  **Spatial-effects.** Fourth in the series of operations is to apply
       the purely spatial effects (e.g. telescope jitter, field rotation,
       etc) to the monochrome image.

    -  **E.** The resulting image represents how the incoming photons from
       the source would be distributed on the focal plane after travelling
       through the entire optical train. At this point the background
       photons are also added to the image. Because SimCADO doesn’t take
       into account the changing sky background, the sky emission is
       approximated as a constant background photon count determined from an
       atmospheric emission curve (either provided by the user or generated
       by ``SkyCalc`` [Noll et al. 2012, Jones et al. 2013]). The mirror
       blackbody emission is also approximated as spatially constant. For
       all filters, with the exception of K, the amount of additional
       photons due to the mirror is close to negligible.

    -  **Detector-effects.** The image is resampled down from the internally
       oversampled grid down to the pixel scale of the detector chips - in
       the case of MICADO either 4 mas or 1.5 mas, depending on mode. The
       final step is to add noise in all its forms to the image. Various
       aspects of the detector noise (correlated and uncorrelated white and
       pink noise read-out (see Rauscher 2015), dead pixels, etc.), as well
       as photon shot noise for both the atmospheric and object photons are
       taken into account. Further effects (e.g. detector persistence,
       cross-talk, etc) are also added to the image at this point.

    -  **F.** The final image represents the spatial distribution of all
       photo-electrons (from the source object + atmosphere + primary
       mirror) plus the electronic noise generated by reading out the
       detector chips. The images from all the chips considered in a
       simulation are packed into a FITS extension and the FITS file is
       either written out to disk, or returned to the user if generated
       during an interactive Python session.

Method behind reading out a ``Detector`` object
-----------------------------------------------

.. todo::
    add in a description of how ``Detectoctor.read_out()`` works